# Flexible Grid's with CSS Grid and React State Management
I'm working a little side project where I am building Conway's Game of Life with JavaScript and React, see [Part I](https://medium.com/@MisteRussell/optimizing-conways-game-of-life-in-javascript-part-i-a237039e3d26) and [Part II](https://medium.com/@MisteRussell/optimizing-conways-game-of-life-in-javascript-part-ii-8cdbb1a972ab) for the process so far. I've completed most of the logic and will be swapping between implementing the visuals and stateful login in React to finish this up. In this post I will be discussing how I am using a CSS grid for the view of the cells that can be selected, and then set into their lifecycle.

### Why am I using CSS grid?
This is my first exposure to `CSS grid` so I am using this is a learning opportunity. I attempted first to get this working with floats/inline-blocks but no dice there. I kept ending up with either hard to manage floating cells, or trailing cells because of the constant changes when editing the number of cells on the screen.

In this scenario the user is presented with a `5x5` grid that they can then `add` or `remove` to cells from. This gives them a bit more flexibility in creating the seed for their game's lifecylce. Initially I'm limiting them to a min of `5x5` and a max of `15x15`. This will likely change when I've been able to test to my satisfaction.

### Debrief
I say this is a `flexible` grid, in that the grid change change the number of cells. I am not referring to a responsive layout optimized for mobile devices. I have not implemented a state-management tool, but am relying on `React's` state management to execute what I want to see.

This was an educational exercise and went beyond teaching me CSS grid. Recently I've switched from using `React.createClass` to extending a `React Component` class. There are a couple of syntactical and property access differences that I will discuss briefly here because of this change.

In this post I will only be discussing how I was able to create a Grid that dynamically changes along with `state`, and the challenges in getting this to work correctly with multiple components. I have not implemented functionality and unidirectional state management for the game at this time.

### Defining State
A grid is composed of two things: a `container` and its `cells`. In `React` distinct features can generally be broken out into their own components. I start by getting components up and running with hard coded `divs` first. Hard coding in the CSS styling helped me figure out the path to dynamically generating the styling.
```
render () {
  const containerStyle = {
    width: `500px`,
    gridTemplateColumns: `100px 100px 100px 100px 100px`
    gridTemplateRows: `100px 100px 100px 100px 100px`
  }
  return (
    <div className={ `container` } style={ containerStyle }>
      { cells }
    </div>
  );
}
```
- `cells` is just an array of simple `divs` to get me started

Now, as mentioned, I know that my `min` number of cells is 5, so I can store that in `state`. That number ties into my hard coded 5 columns, `100px` wide, and 5 rows, `100px` tall. In addition to this, I know that my grid is going to be `500px` wide, regardless of the number of cell the user adds so I can go ahead and add that to `state` too, should I want to change it later. The number of cells a user wants to add, `userBound`, can also be tracked with `state`. State after initial hard coding:
```
this.state = {
  minBound: 5,
  userBound: 0,
  totalBound: 0,
  boardWidth: 500
};
```
In the `componentWillMount()` stage of the component lifecycle, I call a function to update my `totalBound` so that it accurately computes. I'm handling updating my state in a different manner than when I was originally taught. Originally I would have tried to update the style directly with:
```
this.setState({ totalBound: this.state.userBound + this.state.minBound });
```
Now, I am following the more "immutable" approach below. I actually do find this more elegant because it helps us avoid relying on mutable data that may not still have the expected values.
```
this.setState((prevState) => {
  return { totalBound: prevState.userBound + prevState.minBound }
});
```
### Dynamic Generation With Components
My `Grid` and `Cell` components are both stateless and reusable. My grid needs the props width, gridTemplateColumns, and gridTemplateRow to be able to correctly render itself. The container also needs to be passed all of its children so that they actually exist in the container. Passing in a prop of `children` takes care of that, where children is an array of all of the Cell components. My initial thought was to pass parts of my container's state into the Grid component so that it would re-render based on the number of cells the user had chosen. My end goal was to create a function that would render a string for my grid columns and rows, i.e. a 5x5 grid would need `100px 100px 100px 100px 100px` passed to it. My first failure was passing in the totalBound state value as props into the Grid component. The grid component then had a function `createGrid()` that generated the string needed.
```
createGrid() {
  return Array.from(new Array(this.props.totalBound), () => {
    return `${ this.state.boardWidth / this.state.totalBound }px`
    }).join(' ');
}
```
I ran into problems with the Grid component not re-rendering, which still perplexes me a bit, because as the props changed I expected the `createGrid()` function to be called by my `componentWillReceiveProps()` lifecycle stage. I tried a few work arounds, like having the props update the components state with an immediately invoked call back and then decided I was complicating things too much. Leaving my string generation on the parent component actually made more sense. What if I wanted this to not be a dynamically generated grid, just a normal grid? By abstracting the component it is more reusable. So I moved the `createGrid()` function back to my game container and let it rely on state.

Bingo. Because I am updating this.state.totalBound value on a click event, the change in the value recreates the settings strings needed by my grid. Now, when the user adjusts the grid the number of cells changes but it exists in the same bounds.

The Cell component has a similar feature which let's the cell's know their height. The cell is also receiving a click event via a `callback` prop. This isn't being used yet but it will be needed for cell selection later. This unearthed another small challenge. Because of how `this` is scoped in class extensions versus the `createClass` architecture, you can't immediately access the `this.handleClick()` on the cell. You first need to introduce the cell's `this` property into the function. This isn't difficult and can be handled with bind.
- Note: You have to introduce super() for these scenearios because you cannot declare anything without this. It can be omit if you aren't utilizing constructor().
```
constructor(props) {
  super(props);
  this.handleClick = this.handleClick.bind(this);
}
```
### The Result
It seems so simple but it took like a whole day to do with the learning curve to figure out class extensions. The CSS grid setup I'm using is pretty simple so that didn't take long to figure out, but I plan on spending more time investigating these features.
